Introduction and testing with Foundry guides (#183)
base-org/web: apps/base-docs/docs/building-with-base-and-foundry/testing.md

---
title: Testing with Foundry
description: Documentation for Foundry, a toolchain for smart contract development. Learn how to test your smart contracts using Foundry.
keywords: [Foundry, Forge, Foundry Book, smart contract development, toolchain, testing, test]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

In this article, you'll learn how to test your smart contracts using [Foundry], the toolchain for smart contract development.

---

## Objectives

By the end of this guide, you should be able to:

- Understand the importance of testing in smart contract development.
- Write and execute tests for smart contracts using the Forge Standard Library with Foundry.
- Use some of the `cheatcodes` that Foundry provides.

## Overview

Testing is a crucial aspect of smart contract development, ensuring the reliability and security of your code. Foundry provides a robust testing framework that allows developers to create comprehensive test suites for their projects using Solidity.

## My First Test with Foundry

> Considering the default test that the `forge init hello_foundry_in_base` command provides in the seed Foundry project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider the default test that the `forge init hello_foundry_in_base` command provides in the seed Foundry project.
```

> ```javascript

Reviewer 2: I believe we support solidity code blocks if you change `javascript` to `solidity`.

(Apply to all solidity code blocks)

https://github.com/base-org/web/blob/master/apps/base-docs/docusaurus.config.js#L157C40-L157C40

// SPDX-License-Identifier: UNLICENSED
pragma solidity ^0.8.19;

import "forge-std/Test.sol";
import "../src/Counter.sol";

contract CounterTest is Test {
    Counter public counter;

    function setUp() public {
        counter = new Counter();
        counter.setNumber(0);
    }

    function testIncrement() public {
        counter.increment();
        assertEq(counter.number(), 1);
    }

    function testSetNumber(uint256 x) public {
        counter.setNumber(x);
        assertEq(counter.number(), x);
    }
}
```

Take note of the following:

> - Foundry test files are named following the pattern: <ContractName>.t.sol.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Foundry test files are named following the pattern: `<ContractName>.t.sol`
```

> - Smart contract test files are named following the pattern: <ContractName>Test.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Smart contract test files are named following the pattern: `<ContractName>Test`
```

> We can identify the following:
> 
> - Test files in Foundry are named following the pattern: <ContractName>.t.sol.
> - Test files are smart contracts named following the pattern: <ContractName>Test.
> - All the tests inherit from `forge-std/Test.sol`.
> - All the tests contain a public function called `setUp`, which is executed before each test. This is similar to the `beforeEach` hook in the Mocha/Typescript world.
> - Test cases start with the `test` keyword, for instance `testIncrement`.
> - Test cases functions are public.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Take note of the following:

- Foundry test files are named following the pattern: <ContractName>.t.sol.
- Smart contract test files are named following the pattern: <ContractName>Test.
- All tests inherit from `forge-std/Test.sol`.
- All tests contain a public function called `setUp`, which is executed before each test. This is similar to the `beforeEach` hook in the Mocha/Typescript world.
- Test cases start with the `test` keyword, for instance `testIncrement`.
- Test cases functions are public.
```

For more information about writing tests in Foundry, you can follow the official guide for [Writing tests]

> In order to run the test in Foundry, we simply run:

Reviewer: You use the phrase "in order to do X" 4 times. Why not just say "To do X"?

```bash
$ forge test
```

> And we should see in the terminal:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should see in the terminal:
```

Reviewer: You switch between you and we. You should pick one.

```bash
Running 2 tests for test/Counter.t.sol:CounterTest
[PASS] testIncrement() (gas: 28334)
[PASS] testSetNumber(uint256) (runs: 256, μ: 27565, ~: 28343)
Test result: ok. 2 passed; 0 failed; finished in 13.57ms
```

## Using Cheatcodes

Foundry includes a set of [Cheatcodes], which are special instructions that are accessible using the `vm` instance in your tests. Cheatcodes allows you to perform various tasks, including:

> - Manipulate the state of the blockchain

Reviewer 3: This is awesome!

- Test reverts
- Test events
- Change block number
- Change identity 
- And more !

> Let's use our first Cheatcode to modify the `msg.sender` of our tests. 

Reviewer: Again, is it you or we? Because "let us use our" is we. Did someone else write this page? I won't correct the page but you might consider keep the voice the same as the other pages.

    }

    function testSetNumber(uint256 x) public {
        console.log("Calling on testSetNumber");
        vm.prank(vm.addr(0x02));
        counter.setNumber(x);
        assertEq(counter.number(), x);
    }
}
```

Then if we run the `forge test -vv` command, we should see:

```bash
Running 2 tests for test/Counter.t.sol:CounterTest
[PASS] testIncrement() (gas: 35500)
Logs:
  Calling on Setup
  The sender is 0x7FA9385bE102ac3EAc297483Dd6233D62b3e1496
  Calling on testIncrement
  The sender is 0x7E5F4552091A69125d5DfCb7b8C2659029395Bdf

[PASS] testSetNumber(uint256) (runs: 256, μ: 34961, ~: 35506)
Logs:
  Calling on Setup
  The sender is 0x7FA9385bE102ac3EAc297483Dd6233D62b3e1496

Test result: ok. 2 passed; 0 failed; finished in 48.75ms
```

Notice how we call the cheatcode `vm.prank` before the call to the `counter.increment()` and `counter.setNumber(x)` functions. This will allow us to specify a particular address to become the `msg.sender` in the contract. Since the `vm.prank` accepts an address, we simply generate an address using the cheatcode `vm.addr`, where we pass a simple hexadecimal number, which is a valid private key.

## Conclusion

> Congratulations! You've successfully completed your first step in your journey of testing smart contracts using Foundry. As you move forward, keep exploring its rich features and functionalities. The ability to write comprehensive tests and leverage cheatcodes enhances your capabilities in ensuring the reliability and security of your smart contracts.

Reviewer: You're back to "you" ... but you spent the entire page saying "we".

> Congratulations! You've successfully completed your first step in your journey of testing smart contracts using Foundry. As you move forward, keep exploring its rich features and functionalities. The ability to write comprehensive tests and leverage cheatcodes enhances your capabilities in ensuring the reliability and security of your smart contracts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Congratulations! You've successfully completed your first step in your journey of testing smart contracts using Foundry. As you move forward, keep exploring its rich features and functionalities. The ability to write comprehensive tests and leverage cheatcodes ensures the reliability and security of your smart contracts.
```

Reviewer: Break it down: 

> The ability to X enhances your ability in ensuring Y.
